
===== PAGE 1 =====
1714 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2023
Area Efﬁcient Approximate 4-2 Compressor
and Probability-Based Error Adjustment
for Approximate Multiplier
Mingtao Zhang , Graduate Student Member, IEEE , Shinichi Nishizawa , Member, IEEE,
and Shinji Kimura , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Many multipliers based on approximate compres-
sors have been developed for error-tolerant applications such as
image processing to reduce power, but the combination of them
has not been fully studied. This brief proposes a novel 4 gate
4-2 approximate compressor which is complementary with other
compressors from earlier work and constructs a hybrid multiplier
based on the compressors, a constant approximation, and error
correction AND gate. According to the simulation results, the
proposed hybrid approximate multiplier has excellent accuracy
and electrical performance tradeoff and reduces the power-delay-
area product (PDAP) by 66% with an MRED of 2.5% when
compared to the exact multiplier.
Index Terms—Approximate computing, 4-2 compressor, digital
multiplier, compressor combination, error compensation.
I. I NTRODUCTION
M
EDIA processing applications, such as image process-
ing and machine learning, have developed rapidly over
the past two decades. For these applications which involve
human perception, approximate computing is an effective way
to improve power efﬁciency [ 1].
Approximate multipliers are the most popularly used arith-
metic units and are easily modiﬁable. The three parts of a
multiplier that approximation methods could be applied to
are partial product creation, partial product accumulation and
reduction, and ﬁnal addition. The second part reducing partial
products by accumulation consumes the most resources during
the multiplication process [ 2].
Approximate compressors such as 4-2 compressors are usu-
ally used to accelerate the accumulation. Kong and Li [ 3]
broadly classify compressors into high-accuracy and low-
accuracy categories based on the number of output errors.
Low-accuracy approximate compressors mainly focus on
reducing power dissipation. Momeni et al. [ 4] proposed a
symmetrical approximate 4-2 compressor, but it produces a
plus-one error when all four inputs are 0, which is the most
Manuscript received 6 February 2023; accepted 13 March 2023. Date of
publication 16 March 2023; date of current version 12 May 2023. This work
was supported by NEC, Japan. This brief was recommended by Associate
Editor M. Martina. (Corresponding author: Mingtao Zhang.)
The authors are with the Graduate School of Information, Production and
System, Waseda University, Kitakyushu 808-0135, Fukuoka, Japan (e-mail:
mutouz@akane.waseda.jp; shinji_kimura@waseda.jp).
Color versions of one or more ﬁgures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSII.2023.3257852.
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCSII.2023.3257852
common case for all input patterns. Sabetzadeh et al. [ 5]
proposed a simple compressor only consists of a majority gate
and assumes S output is a constant 1.
This brief studies approximate compressors and shows the
following contributions:
• A new tiny area approximate 4-2 compressor with only
four logic gates is proposed. The compressor’s output
errors occur regularly with speciﬁc input patterns.
• Esposito’s compressors are combined in a novel way
to adjust the error probability that different input pat-
terns will occur. The combination reduces error and
signiﬁcantly enhances electrical performance.
• An approximate multiplier with low resource cost is
developed based on the proposed compressor. The simu-
lation results demonstrate that the proposed approximate
multiplier outperforms the present multipliers in terms of
PDAP and accuracy tradeoff.
This brief is organized as follows. Section II introduces the
compressor-based approximate multipliers most relevant to our
design and their features. Section III shows the proposed archi-
tecture of the compressor with its error characteristics and a
proposed multiplier. The simulation results of accuracy and
electrical performance, and comparison on an application with
previous compressor-based approximate multipliers are shown
in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes this brief.
II. R
ELATED WORK
A. Compressors With Same Output Weight
Pei et al. [ 6] and Esposito et al. [ 7] designed a series of
new approximate compressors generating the same weight out-
puts. These compressors contain fewer gates and no XOR or
XNOR gates so they are indubitably competitive in electrical
performance. Because initial partial products are three times
more likely to be 1 than 0, the error should not be signiﬁcant
even if these compressors always generate the output to less
than the exact output when the majority of the inputs are 1.
However, the compressor design proposed by Esposito et al.
in [7] is based on the initial partial products. The 8-bit approx-
imate multiplier is built with two layers of compressors, and
the compressors at the second layer receive inputs with a larger
probability of becoming 1. Using Esposito’s approximate com-
pressors on the second layer results in a high error rate, while
using exact compressors results in high power usage. In this
1549-7747 c⃝ 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on June 28,2026 at 12:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 2 =====
ZHANG et al.: AREA EFFICIENT APPROXIMATE 4-2 COMPRESSOR AND PROBABILITY 1715
TABLE I
TRUTH TABLE OF APPROXIMATE 4-2 C OMPRESSOR
case, the accuracy and electrical performance tradeoff of their
approximate multipliers are insufﬁcient.
B. Constant Approximation and Error Correction Module
Kumar et al. [ 8] designed a 4-2 compressor that output
becomes a minus-one error when the last two bits of the input
are 1. An AND gate connected to the last two bits of the com-
pressor’s input is used to compensate for the error, which is
similar to [10]. Besides, the last four bits of the multiplier are
truncated using an unusual method that substitutes an average
number 0110 for the traditional 0000. By doing this, the error
can be reduced without making an extra effort.
The approximate multiplier in [ 8] has the one of highest
accuracy among the multipliers using the compressor with four
error cases in the truth table. However, to receive the output
of error correction AND gate in the ﬁrst level, the multiplier
modiﬁes a half adder to a full adder and a full adder to an exact
compressor. Furthermore, the error correction modules extend
the propagation path to some extent, which would enlarge the
delay of the multiplier.
III. P
ROPOSED UNSIGNED APPROXIMATE MULTIPLIER
A. Proposed 4-2 Approximate Compressor
If we compel the erroneous output to occur at speciﬁc input
characteristics, as shown in [ 8], we can remedy compressor
errors with a simple logic gate. The method can be extended
to scenarios with more than four faults of the total sixteen input
patterns. A new area efﬁcient 4-2 compressor is designed in
an effort to make the sum of S (sum) and C (carry) as close
to the exact result as possible and to improve the regularity of
the Karnaugh map. Table I shows the proposed compressor’s
outputs S and C.
The C derived from Table I is OR as shown in equation ( 1).
According to De Morgan’s laws, the proposed expression of
S is shown in equation ( 2) under the assumption of using the
fewest number of logic gates possible. It is worth noting that
Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed compressor.
NAND and NOR gates have better performance than AND
and OR gates [ 3].
C = P1 + P2( 1 )
S = (P1 · P2 + P1 · P2)(P3 + P4)
= (P1 ⊕ P2) + (P3 + P4) (2)
The architecture of the proposed 4-2 compressor is
presented in Fig. 1. This compressor only has two NOR gates
and one XOR gate and one OR gate, which makes the com-
pressor consume very few transistors. So even though it has six
errors out of sixteen input patterns, the design is still attractive
and competitive.
B. Error Adjustment With Probability
Table I shows the probability of each input and the total
probability of error is 70 /256 ≈ 0.273, which is rather large.
The error rates of the plus-one error is 54 /256 ≈ 0.211 and
the minus-one error is 16 /256 ≈ 0.063. Since the probability
of being 1 is 1/4 and the probability of being 0 is 3/4 for the
initial partial products, the corresponding plus-one error for
0100 and 1000 is very likely to happen.
To solve this unfavorable situation, it is essential to avoid
using the proposed compressors at the ﬁrst level, where the
inputs of the compressors are directly connected to the initial
partial products. The error probability in the ﬁrst level is modi-
ﬁed by using Esposito’s approximate compressors in [7]a tt h e
ﬁrst level and the error produced by the proposed compressors
in the second level is compensated.
The behavior of Esposito’s 4-2 compressor is shown in
Table I. The output of Esposito’s 3-2 or 4-2 compressor will
be 11 if two or more inputs are 1. We ﬁnd that the error proba-
bility can be somewhat compensated by combining Esposito’s
compressors for the initial partial products and the proposed
compressor at the second layer.
The structure of the proposed 8-bit hybrid approximate
multiplier is illustrated in Fig. 2, which combines two dis-
tinct approximate compressors and makes use of the error
correction module (i.e., AND gate) and constant approxima-
tion from [8]. For the ﬁnal addition, a ripple carry adder (RCA)
is employed.
As Fig. 2 shows, two types of Esposito’s compressors, 3-2
and 4-2, are used in the ﬁrst level. For Esposito’s 4-2 com-
pressor, the probability of outputs w
1 and w2 being 0 are
both 135 /256 ≈ 0.527 as shown in Table I. For Esposito’s
3-2 compressor, the probability of an output w1 being 0
is 36 /64 ≈ 0.563, and the other output w2 being 0 is
45/64 ≈ 0.703. The four inexact columns with unique input
patterns are named C4 to C1 respectively. The probability of
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on June 28,2026 at 12:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 3 =====
1716 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2023
Fig. 2. Proposed hybrid approximate multiplier structure (ProposedH).
TABLE II
PROBABILITY TABLE OF THE PROPOSED COMPRESSOR
plus-one error and minus-one error at each column are reported
in Table II.
In Table II, origin means the probability of the correspond-
ing input patterns of compressors at the ﬁrst level in which
initial partial products are directly connected (the same as
“Prob.” in Table I). With the usage of Esposito’s compres-
sors at the ﬁrst level, although the total error possibility (i.e.,
P
Total) of every single approximate compressor at the second
level has been increased, the higher minus-one error possi-
bility and lower plus-one error possibility make the proposed
hybrid approximate multiplier more reasonable to use the error
correcting AND gate.
The proposed hybrid concept is applied to a 16-bit approx-
imate multiplier, where Esposito’s compressors are used at
the ﬁrst and third levels. Two error correcting AND gates are
carried out in the second level to reduce the error distance
without sacriﬁcing too many resources. Besides, the truncation
TABLE III
EVA L UAT I O NRESULTS OF 8-B IT UNSIGNED MULTIPLIERS
is adjusted to 6 bits, and the compensation constant is set to
the average value of 011110.
IV . EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section compares the 8-bit and 16-bit unsigned approx-
imate multipliers. For the 8-bit approximate multiplier, various
compressors proposed in [ 4], [ 5], [ 6], [ 7], [ 8], [ 9] and one
in this brief (Proposed) are applied to the uniﬁed Dadda
structure illustrated in paper [3] with the same truncation tech-
nique. Note that Proposed only uses the proposed compressors.
The hybrid structure illustrated in Fig. 2 (Proposed
H) is also
designed and compared. 16-bit approximate multipliers are
implemented with ten columns of approximate compressors
and six columns of constant approximation. In particular, the
additional error correction modules in [ 6] and [ 8] are applied
to their multipliers in respect of the authors’ intentions. As for
the multiplier with compressors in [ 7], their compressors are
used only at the ﬁrst layer because of the large error when
using the second layer.
A. Error Analysis
The normalized mean error distance (NMED) and mean
relative error distance (MRED) [ 2] are commonly used error
metrics when judging the accuracy of approximate computing.
To obtain reliable error metrics results, we carry out exhaustive
65536 cases for 8-bit multipliers and take the average result
of ten times independent 1 million random cases for 16-bit
multipliers. The results are respectively shown in Table III and
Table IV.
In Table III, Esposito’s design and Kumar’s design have
the best MRED and NMED because of the lower usage of
approximate compressors or error-correction modules. The
error performance of the multiplier based on the proposed
compressor (Proposed) is not notably impressive, but the
proposed hybrid approximate multiplier (Proposed
H) has the
best NMED and MRED among the low-accuracy category and
a 60.65% reduction of error over Proposed multiplier. TableIV
demonstrates that the proposed hybrid 16-bit approximate
multiplier is competitive even in the high-accuracy category.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on June 28,2026 at 12:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 4 =====
ZHANG et al.: AREA EFFICIENT APPROXIMATE 4-2 COMPRESSOR AND PROBABILITY 1717
TABLE IV
EVA L UAT I O NRESULTS OF 16-B IT UNSIGNED MULTIPLIERS
Fig. 3. Hardware and accuracy tradeoff on various multipliers. (a) 8-bit PDAP
and MRED comparison. (b) 8-bit PDAP and NMED comparison. (c)16-bit
PDAP and MRED comparison. (d)16-bit PDAP and NMED comparison.
Pei’s design’s high accuracy is due to an extra column of exact
compressors and only one layer of approximate compressors.
B. ASIC Synthesis
All the stated approximate multipliers are modeled using
Verilog and synthesized as combinational circuits by Synopsys
Design Compiler using a commercial 65 nm process with
a nominal supply voltage of 0.7 V , toggle rate of 20% and
maximum delay constraint of 6 ns for 8-bit multipliers and
12 ns for 16-bit multipliers. The power-delay-area product
(PDAP) is a decisive metric that we utilize to fully describe
the electrical performance, which includes area, total power
consumption, and maximum delay. The evaluation results are
shown in Table III and Table IV.
The synthesis results demonstrate that Sabetzadeh’s design
has unquestionably the best PDAP reduction but suffers
from the largest NMED and MRED. The two proposed
approximative multipliers are ranked second and third in terms
Fig. 4. Image sharpening results computed by 8-bit multipliers. (a) Original
image. (b)-(f) Sharpened images.
TABLE V
PSNR R ESULTS FOR IMAGE SHARPENING APPLICATION
of PDAP reduction, respectively. And the proposed hybrid
approximate multiplier in particular has a remarkably low
delay. Proposed multiplier’s PDAP reduction is 59.13% (8-bit)
and 59.06% (16-bit) less than the exact multiplier. When
it comes to Proposed
H multiplier, the reduction becomes to
66.61% (8-bit) and 66.08% (16-bit).
The NMED versus PDAP graph and the MRED versus
PDAP graph of 8-bit multipliers and 16-bit multipliers are
plotted in Fig. 3 to depict the tradeoffs between electrical
performance and accuracy. The proposed hybrid approximate
multiplier is shown to be closest to the axis origin in both plots,
particularly in Fig. 3 (a) and Fig. 3 (c), which almost indi-
cates that our design has the best tradeoff among the existing
relevant designs.
C. Image Processing
Image processing is one of the most common error-resilient
applications. Three photos, titled “Barbara,” “Baboon,” and
“Lena” that were downloaded from the same website are sub-
jected to image sharpening. The pixel depth of all these photos
is 8 bits, so we use 8-bit approximate multipliers to take care
of the exact multiplication function during image sharpen-
ing using MATLAB [ 11]. The original image “Barbara” and
images sharpened using an exact multiplier and four approx-
imate multipliers which performed well in Fig. 3, are shown
in Fig. 4.
To access the quality of the sharpening application, the
peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) is calculated in Table V.
Proposed
H multiplier has a lower but close PSNR compared
with the other two multipliers, with an average result of
33.20dB, but has the best PDAP performance. On the other
hand, it is difﬁcult to tell the difference between the sharpened
images in Fig. 4 with the naked eye.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on June 28,2026 at 12:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
===== PAGE 5 =====
1718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 70, NO. 5, MAY 2023
V. C ONCLUSION
In this brief, we have presented a novel area efﬁcient 4-2
compressor and a brand-new hybrid combination method of
probabilistic adjustment employing approximate compressors
designed by us and by Esposito et al. for an approximate
multiplier. In comparison to existing multipliers, the proposed
hybrid approximate multiplier offers a signiﬁcantly more
appealing electrical performance and accuracy tradeoff and
one of the lowest PDAP (66% reduction with 2.5% MRED).
The proposed hybrid approximate multiplier is also tested for
image sharpening and 33.20dB PSNR is obtained. Basically,
it is quite challenging to design an approximate multiplier
with absolute beneﬁt, and the optimal answer is typically
the one that best suits the target application. Our approxi-
mate multiplier design offers a candidate with a competitive
error-electrical performance tradeoff.
R
EFERENCES
[1] A. Bosio, D. Ménard, and O. Sentieys, Eds. Approximate Computing
Techniques: From Component-to Application-Level. Cham, Switzerland:
Springer, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://link.springer.com/book/10.
1007/978-3-030-94705-7
[2] A. G. M. Strollo, E. Napoli, D. De Caro, N. Petra, and G. D. Meo,
“Comparison and extension of approximate 4-2 compressors for low-
power approximate multipliers,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg.
Papers, vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 3021–3034, Sep. 2020.
[3] T. Kong and S. Li, “Design and analysis of approximate 4-2 compressors
for high-accuracy multipliers,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr.
(VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 1771–1781, Oct. 2021.
[4] A. Momeni, J. Han, P. Montuschi, and F. Lombardi, “Design and
analysis of approximate compressors for multiplication,” IEEE Trans.
Comput., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 984–994, Apr. 2015.
[5] F. Sabetzadeh, M. H. Moaiyeri, and M. Ahmadinejad, “A majority-based
imprecise multiplier for ultra-efﬁcient approximate image multiplica-
tion,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers , vol. 66, no. 11,
pp. 4200–4208, Nov. 2019.
[6] H. Pei, X. Yi, H. Zhou, and Y . He, “Design of ultra-low power con-
sumption approximate 4-2 compressors based on the compensation
characteristic,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs , vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 461–465, Jan. 2021.
[7] D. Esposito, A. G. M. Strollo, E. Napoli, D. de Caro, and
N. Petra, “Approximate multipliers based on new approximate com-
pressors,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers , vol. 65, no. 12,
pp. 4169–4182, Dec. 2018.
[8] U. Anil Kumar, S. K. Chatterjee, and S. E. Ahmed, “Low-
power compressor-based approximate multipliers with error correct-
ing module,” IEEE Embdded Syst. Lett. , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 59–62,
Jun. 2022.
[9] X. Yi, H. Pei, Z. Zhang, H. Zhou, and Y . He, “Design of an energy-
efﬁcient approximate compressor for error-resilient multiplications,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS) , 2019, pp. 1–5.
[10] M. Ha and S. Lee, “Multipliers with approximate 4-2 compressors and
error recovery modules,” IEEE Embdded Syst. Lett. , vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 6–9, Mar. 2018.
[11] M. Ahmadinejad, M. H. Moaiyeri, and F. Sabetzadeh, “Energy and
area efﬁcient imprecise compressors for approximate multiplication
at nanoscale,” AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun. , vol. 110, Oct. 2019,
Art. no. 152859.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shanghai Jiaotong University. Downloaded on June 28,2026 at 12:12:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 